// $Id$
[[introduction]]
=== Introduction

Yasm is a BSD-licensed assembler that is designed from the ground up
to allow for multiple assembler syntaxes to be supported (e.g. NASM,
GNU AS, etc.) in addition to multiple output object formats and
multiple instruction sets.  Its modular architecture allows additional
object formats, debug formats, and syntaxes to be added relatively
easily.

Yasm started life in 2001 as a rewrite of the NASM (Netwide) x86
assembler under the BSD license.  Since then, it has matched and
exceeded NASM's capabilities, incorporating features such as
supporting the 64-bit AMD64 architecture, parsing GNU AS syntax, and
generating STABS, DWARF2, and CodeView 8 debugging information.

[[license]]
=== License

Yasm is licensed under the 2-clause and 3-clause ""revised"" BSD
licenses, with one exception: the Bit::Vector module used by the
mainline version of Yasm to implement its large integer and
machine-independent floating point support is triple-licensed under
the Artistic license, GPL, and LGPL.  The ""yasm-nextgen"" codebase
uses a different BSD-licensed implementation and is thus entirely
under BSD-equivalent licenses.  The full text of the licenses are
provided in the Yasm source distribution.

This user manual is licensed under the 2-clause BSD license.

[[material-covered]]
=== Material Covered in this Book

This book is intended to be a user's manual for Yasm, serving as both
an introduction and a general-purpose reference.  While mentions may
be made in various sections of Yasm's implementation (usually to
explain the reasons behind bugs or unusual aspects to various
features), this book will not go into depth explaining how Yasm does
its job; for an in-depth discussion of Yasm's internals, see _The
Design and Implementation of the Yasm Assembler_.

// vim: set syntax=asciidoc sw=2 tw=70:
